[#985] Create a ZIP Draft to document Regtest mode (#986)
zcash/zips: zips/draft-pacu-regtest-local-consensus-definition.md

Reviewer: nit: it's difficult to read this on a wide monitor, please hard-wrap lines.

| 317  | [Proportional Transfer Fee Mechanism](https://github.com/zcash/zips/blob/main/zips/zip-0317.rst) | No changes |
| 320  | [Defining an Address Type to which funds can only be sent from Transparent Addresses](https://github.com/zcash/zips/blob/main/zips/zip-0320.rst) | Changes on HRP of String encoding |
| 321  | [Payment Request URIs](https://github.com/zcash/zips/blob/main/zips/zip-0321.rst) | No changes |
| 401  | [Addressing Mempool Denial-of-Service](https://github.com/zcash/zips/blob/main/zips/zip-0401.rst) | No changes |
| 1014 | [Establishing a Dev Fund for ECC, ZF, and Major Grants](https://github.com/zcash/zips/blob/main/zips/zip-1014.rst) | should include regtest recipients |
| 1015 | [Block Subsidy Allocation for Non-Direct Development Funding](https://github.com/zcash/zips/blob/main/zips/zip-1015.rst) | No changes |
| 2001 | [Lockbox Funding Streams](https://github.com/zcash/zips/blob/main/zips/zip-2001.rst) | No changes |

### Behevior for ZIP-155
Peer-to-peer communications on Regtest MUST be restricted to localhost nodes. See "Regtest nodes and Network connections"

### Behaviour for ZIP-200 Network Upgrade Mechanism

> Regtest nodes should implement a way to configure parameters such as Network Upgrade activation heights and their respective consensus branch IDs. For convenience these should be defined on this ZIP and to be used in all libraries that enable Regtest testing. Configuration should favor that such values can be altered and/or added if necessary, for example to develop a new Network Upgrade. Regtest client libraries SHOULD accommodate to such flexibility. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It must be possible to configure a regtest node with a mapping between Network Upgrade activation heights and consensus branch IDs. It must be possible for such configuration to enable the development of functionality for not-yet-released Network Upgrades, in order to enable testing of new protocol features in advance of mainnet or testnet activation. Client libraries SHOULD also accommodate such flexibility. 
```

```
  ZIP: Unassigned
  Title: Regtest: Definition of a Local Consensus test mode for Zcash Full-Nodes
  Owners: ZIP Editors
  Original-Authors: Francisco Gindre <pacu@zecdev.org>
  Credits: Daira-Emma Hopwood
           Zancas (Zingo Labs)
           idky137 (Zingo Labs)
           Kris Nuttycombe
  Status: Draft
  Category: Consensus
  Created: 2025-02-26
  License: MIT
  Pull-Request: <https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/986>
```
# Regtest: Definition of a Local Consensus test mode for Zcash Full-Nodes

## Terminology 

The key words "MUST", "REQUIRED", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", and "MAY" in this document
are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [^BCP14] when, and only when, they 
appear in all capitals.

The terms "Mainnet" and "Testnet" in this document are to be interpreted as defined 
in the Zcash protocol specification [^protocol-networks].

## Abstract
Regtest is a testing mode inherited from the Bitcoin node. It provides a way to 
have a consensus node on a local network with a private state that a developer 
can control in order to reproduce certain situations deterministically for 
testing purposes. Regtest, as it was implemented on Zcashd, is similar to a 

> “testnet” but without miners and remote peers.

Reviewer 2: If I recall correctly many of the qa/rpc-tests in zcash acually have more than local "peer"..  I wonder whether the "remote-vs-local" distinction here, might be somewhat orthogonal to the purpose of regtest mode, which though frequently used with multiple nodes in the same ip/tcp space, could be used more "remotely" with the same regtest properties.

## Motivation
It is necessary to define Regtest mode so that different implementations of Zcash

> Full Nodes provide the same capabilities so that testing infrastructure can be 

Reviewer 2: Again it seems to me that "regtest" has utility for relatively low-capability "nodes".  That is, less than "full".

Author: what is a "low-capability" node?

interoperable. Regtest mode was inherited from Bitcoin functionality and never 
defined in a ZIP due to resource constraints and priorities. Differences between 
Zebra and Zcashd Regtest implementations found by developers involved in Zcashd 
deprecation motivated this ZIP as a way to document existing assumptions, 
expectations and functionalites of Regtest, and to document regtest-only features.
This ZIP documents differences in behavior, values, expectations and assumpions 
in comparison to Testnet. It uses the Zcash protocol and existing ZIPs as guiding 
principles for the document structure. It also documents pre-existing and 
previously *undocumented* requirements, constants and values that are present in
the Zcashd 6.1.0 implementation and `zcash_protocol` crate 0.4.3[^zcash_protocol].
This ZIP should be useful for Core Developers working on full node implementations
but also a handbook for developers and QA testers to make use and take advantage
of Regtest functionality to ensure test coverage of their codebases and a high 
quality assurance to Zcash users.

## Requirements
1. Nodes launched in Regtest mode MUST be able to generate deterministic sequences

> of blocks and transactions. 

Reviewer 2: How about:

"Finalizers, launched in regtest mode, MUST be able to **efficiently** generate deterministic sequences of valid blocks of transactions."

1. Regtest MUST override, adjust, by-pass or ignore consensus checks that are 

> specifically designed to avoid requirement 1 in Testnet and Mainnet

Reviewer 2: Do we have an extra negation here?

1. Developers MUST specify the activation heights of the different Network 
Upgrades on launch via parameters or configuration file.

> 1. Remote Peer-to-Peer connections MUST NOT be allowed. All peers MUST be local 

Reviewer 2: This may be explained below, in which case I will circle back and resolve this conversation, but why the "local only" constraint?

Reviewer 2: Explained.

> Regtestand share the same configuration (unless there is an arbitrary failure 

Reviewer 2: "Regtestand " --> "Regtest and "

| 1014 | [Establishing a Dev Fund for ECC, ZF, and Major Grants](https://github.com/zcash/zips/blob/main/zips/zip-1014.rst) | should include regtest recipients |
| 1015 | [Block Subsidy Allocation for Non-Direct Development Funding](https://github.com/zcash/zips/blob/main/zips/zip-1015.rst) | No changes |
| 2001 | [Lockbox Funding Streams](https://github.com/zcash/zips/blob/main/zips/zip-2001.rst) | No changes |

### Behavior for ZIP-155
Peer-to-peer communications on Regtest MUST be restricted to localhost nodes. 
See "Regtest nodes and Network connections"

### Behaviour for ZIP-200 Network Upgrade Mechanism
It must be possible to configure a regtest node with a mapping between Network 
Upgrade activation heights and consensus branch IDs. It must be possible for such
configuration to enable the development of functionality for not-yet-released 
Network Upgrades, in order to enable testing of new protocol features in advance
of mainnet or testnet activation. Client libraries SHOULD also accommodate such
flexibility. 

### Behavior for ZIP-208 Shorter Block Target Spacing
In Regtest mode, block generation is dictated by whomever is ordering the node 

> o generate one or more new blocks at will. Difficulty adjustments to enforce a 

Reviewer 2: "o generate" --> "to generate"

```
  ZIP: Unassigned
  Title: Regtest: Definition of a Local Consensus test mode for Zcash Full-Nodes

>   Owners: ZIP Editors

Reviewer 3: Owners must be specific named people who have each explicitly consented to be an Owner. I haven't, so this can't just be replaced by the current ZIP Editors (nor do the ZIP Editors have time to be assigned the role of maintaining ZIPs by others). Normally the Owners of the ZIP are the people who wrote it.

quality assurance to Zcash users.

## Requirements
1. Nodes launched in Regtest mode MUST be able to generate deterministic sequences
of blocks and transactions. 
1. Regtest MUST override, adjust, by-pass or ignore consensus checks that are 
specifically designed to avoid the efficiency in requirement 1 in Testnet and 
Mainnet
1. Developers MUST specify the activation heights of the different Network 
Upgrades on launch via parameters or configuration file.
1. Remote Peer-to-Peer connections MUST NOT be allowed. All peers MUST be local 
Regtest and share the same configuration (unless there is an arbitrary failure 
scenario under test).
1. Regtest can activate all Network Upgrades at once while maintaining the order
of the Network Upgrades when an evaluation in code relies or depends on the 
sequence of Network Upgrade activations.
1. Block generation can be generated at will ensuring that deterministic sequences
of blocks and transactions can be generated as defined in requirement 1.
1. Changes on Human-Readable Parts (HRP) of address string encodings (if applicable)
are defined with their respective prefix to signal a regtest variant.

> 1. Regtest functionality SHOULD allow developers to ensure test coverage of their 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Regtest functionality should allow developers to ensure test coverage of their 
```
This is not a conformance requirement.
